The Israeli authorities have deliberately created living conditions aimed at causing the destruction of a portion of the population of Gaza, by intentionally depriving Palestinian civilians in the enclave of adequate access to water, which has likely caused thousands of deaths.
In doing so, the Israeli authorities are responsible for the crime against humanity of extermination, and for acts of genocide. The course of conduct of the Israeli authorities, as well as certain statements suggesting that Israeli officials wished to destroy the Palestinians in Gaza, could constitute the crime of genocide.
Other governments and international organizations should take all necessary measures to prevent genocide in Gaza, including by suspending military aid, reviewing bilateral agreements and diplomatic relations with Israel, and supporting the International Criminal Court and other initiatives to deliver justice. 
Jerusalem, December 19, 2024 – Israeli authorities have intentionally deprived Palestinian civilians in Gaza of adequate access to water since October 2023, likely resulting in thousands of deaths and committing the crime against humanity of extermination and acts of genocide, Human Rights Watch said in a report released today. 

Report cover in English
December 19, 2024
Extermination and Acts of Genocide
Israel Deliberately Depriving Palestinians in Gaza of Water


In the 179-page report, Extermination and Acts of Genocide: Israel Deliberately Depriving Palestinians in Gaza of Water , Human Rights Watch found that Israeli authorities intentionally deprived Palestinians in Gaza of access to safe drinking water and sanitation necessary for basic human survival. Israeli authorities and forces first cut off and then restricted the supply of running water to Gaza; rendered much of the water and sanitation infrastructure unusable by cutting off electricity and restricting fuel supplies; deliberately destroyed and damaged water and sanitation networks and the equipment needed to repair them; and obstructed the flow of critical water supplies into the Gaza Strip.

Water is essential to human life, but for more than a year the Israeli government has deliberately deprived Palestinians in Gaza of the bare minimum they need to survive  , said Tirana Hassan , executive director of Human Rights Watch.   This is not just neglect, but a deliberate policy of deprivation that has led to thousands of deaths from dehydration and disease, constituting the crime against humanity of extermination and an act of genocide.  


Human Rights Watch interviewed 66 Palestinians from Gaza, four employees of the Coastal Municipalities Water Utility CMWU, 31 health workers, and 15 employees of United Nations agencies and international humanitarian organizations in Gaza. Human Rights Watch also analyzed satellite imagery, photographs, and videos taken between the start of hostilities in October 2023 and September 2024, as well as data collected and estimates provided by doctors, epidemiologists, humanitarian organizations, and water and sanitation experts. 

Human Rights Watch concluded that Israeli authorities intentionally created conditions of life designed to cause the physical destruction of Palestinians in Gaza, in whole or in part. This policy, inflicted as part of the mass killing of Palestinian civilians in Gaza, means that Israeli authorities committed the crime against humanity of extermination, which continues today. This policy also constitutes one of the five   acts of genocide   under the 1948 Genocide Convention. Genocidal intent could also be inferred from this policy, as well as from statements by Israeli officials suggesting that they wished to destroy Palestinians in Gaza; therefore, this policy could constitute the crime of genocide.

Immediately following the October 7, 2023 attacks in southern Israel by Palestinian armed groups from Gaza led by Hamas, which Human Rights Watch found to constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity, Israeli authorities cut off electricity supplies and blocked fuel supplies to the Gaza Strip. On October 9, then-Defense Minister Yoav Gallant announced a   complete siege   of Gaza , stating  :   There will be no electricity, no food, no water, no fuel, everything is closed  .